NMS-13370: Hardware Inventory Plugin Docs (#3550)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/provisioning/hardware-inventory.adoc

[[hardware-inventory-plugin]]
= Hardware Inventory Plugin

== Introduction

{page-component-title} can be extended to import Entity-MIB information from SNMP agents to enrich node data.
There are two types of Entity-MIBs.
The first type is a generic implementation of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4133[RFC 4133 ENTITY-MIB].
The second type are vendor specific Entity-MIBs, which are provided by some manufacturers.

These Entity-MIBs provide dynamic attributes for describing device components.
This includes information such as model number, description, serial number, and more.

> These fields can be added to nodes in {page-component-title} using a provisioning adapter extension of the Provisiond service.

Author: ```suggestion
The optional hardware inventory extension of the Provisiond service will add these fields to nodes in {page-component-title}.
```

== Installation and configuration

IMPORTANT: To use this feature you have to install the SNMP hardware inventory plugin from the repository.

****
To install the opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory package:

* For RPM-based distributions:
** `yum install opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory`
* For Debian-based distributions:
** `apt-get install opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory`
****

The package creates the configuration file `$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml` which defines the support for the https://tools.cisco.com/Support/SNMP/do/BrowseMIB.do?mibName=ENTITY-MIB[CISCO-ENTITY-MIB] as a starter example.

Any MIB column indexed by `entPhysicalIndex` can be added to the configuration file and the hardware inventory adapter will collect the value and store it for each entity that contains a non-null value for the custom attribute.

> The `<hw-extension>` element lets you group a list of Entity-MIB extensions defined in `<mibObj>` elements based on a sysOidMask of a node.

Author: ```suggestion
The `hw-extension` element lets you group a list of Entity-MIB extensions defined in `mibObj` elements based on a sysOidMask of a node.
```

> If the system enterprise ID of the node matches the `sysOidMask` defined on the `hw-extension`, the `mibObj` entities inside are collected for populating the inventory.

Author: Removing the <> for consistency.

    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.2"  type="string" alias="ceAssetSerialNumber" replace="entPhysicalSerialNum" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.3"  type="string" alias="ceAssetOrderablePartNumber" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.4"  type="string" alias="ceAssetHardwareRevision" replace="entPhysicalHardwareRev" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.5"  type="string" alias="ceAssetMfgAssyNumber" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.6"  type="string" alias="ceAssetMfgAssyRevision" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.7"  type="string" alias="ceAssetFirmwareID" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.8"  type="string" alias="ceAssetFirmwareRevision" replace="entPhysicalFirmwareRev" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.9"  type="string" alias="ceAssetSoftwareID" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.10" type="string" alias="ceAssetSoftwareRevision" replace="entPhysicalSoftwareRev" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.11" type="string" alias="ceAssetCLEI" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.12" type="string" alias="ceAssetAlias" />
</hw-extension>
----

> In this example, only the nodes that match the `sysOidMask .1.3.6.1.4.1.9` (Cisco devices) are candidates to discover the `mibObj` entities defined on the extension group.

Reviewer: Hardware discovery will always happen using the content of `ENTITY-MIB::entPhysicalTable` when the adapter is installed. What we see in the configuration file is optional and only required when you want to "extend" what is already provided via `entPhysicalTable`.

The above gives me the impression that you must add the `hw-extension` to get the adapter working, and that's not the case. Even Cisco devices would have data without that configuration, as long as they support the ENTITY-MIB. With that configuration, you'd be "enhancing" the existing content with the vendor-specific tables indexed by the `entPhysicalIndex`.

Makes sense?

Author: I just pushed an update to line 28 to clarify this fact.

> The definition of `ceAssetSerialNumber` has been configured to replace one of the base attributes `entPhysicalSerialNum` so the adapter will know to override the generic ENTITY-MIB attribute instead of creating a new custom attribute entry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The definition of `ceAssetSerialNumber` has been configured to replace one of the base attributes `entPhysicalSerialNum` so the adapter will know to override the generic Entity-MIB attribute instead of creating a new custom attribute entry.
```

> Once you have configured your `snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`, the Provisiond service attempts to collect hardware inventory data when it refreshes requisitions.

Reviewer: Not true; it will happen, even if you have empty content in `snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`. The only requirement is that the device supports the `entPhysicalTable` from the `ENTITY-MIB`.

Author: The intent of this was to indicate the config is for custom fields, and an update has been pushed to notate that, in conjunction with the change from your other note.

Reviewer: I understand, but I think it is important to let the users know that there is no need to add or modify content on that file for the adapter to work. You can empty its content (no `hw-extension` entries), and it will still work if the device supports the `ENTITY-MIB`.

Author: I added that up on line 28 of the last commit.  This section is for showing an example of collecting custom fields.

Reviewer: Maybe it is the redaction style, but I guess it's ok. Perhaps being a non-native English speaker makes me think that I need to physically see the word "optional" not to have doubts that I don't need to apply something.

Author: It may partially be the way these comments are displayed.  See https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms/commit/a5ed66ce07a5e86e38126f8ee72d03f4d31018ad for my latest edits on this suggestion.  I have done some reorganizing.

> Once your `snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml` file has been configured, the Provisiond service will start attempting to collect hardware inventory data when refreshing requisitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have configured your `snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`, the Provisiond service attempts to collect hardware inventory data when it refreshes requisitions.
```

After synchronizing the requisition, you should be able to see a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventorySuccessful` event to confirm inventory was collected.

> This event will be triggered only when the provisioning adapter detects changed hardware inventory for a node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This event is triggered only when the provisioning adapter detects changed hardware inventory for a node.
```

> If for some reason, there is a problem retrieving or storing the inventory data, a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventoryFailed` event will be sent instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is a problem retrieving or storing the inventory data, a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventoryFailed` event will be sent instead.
```

== Viewing collected hardware inventory information

To view inventory information collected for a node, click the "Hardware Info" link on the node's page in the Web UI.

> If the node has hardware inventory, {page-component-title} will display all collected fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the node has hardware inventory, {page-component-title} displays all collected fields.
```

TIP: It is also possible to retrieve and update hardware inventory information via the xref:development:rest/nodes.adoc#nodes-rest[Nodes REST endpoint].
See the REST documentation for more information.

== Using hardware information in events and notifications

A set of placeholders are available in {page-component-title} to enrich the content of the events, alarms, and notifications.

> Because of the hierarchical nature of the hardware entities, you must provide two fields in order to obtain the value of the required attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of the hierarchical nature of the hardware entities, you must provide two fields to obtain the value of the required attribute.
```

> This two fields are either the `entPhysicalIndex` or the `entPhysicalName` and the name of the attribute to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These two fields are either the `entPhysicalIndex` or the `entPhysicalName` and the name of the attribute to use.
```

> The `entPhysicalIndex` guarantees that you are going to get always the same entity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `entPhysicalIndex` guarantees that you always get the same entity.
```

Using `entPhysicalName` is not always a unique way to identify an entity, depending on the device manufacturer.

> When using the name, the first entity that matches the given `entPhysicalName` will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the name, the first entity that matches the given `entPhysicalName` is used.
```

> It is possible to specify a regular expression to validate against the `entPhysicalName` by prefixing the field with a `~`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specify a regular expression to validate against the `entPhysicalName` by prefixing the field with a `~`.
```

> When using regular expression matching, the first attribute matched will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using regular expression matching, the first attribute matched is used.
```

Sample placeholders naming structure:

* %hardware[\{entPhysicalIndex}:\{attributeName}]%
* %hardware[\{entPhysicalName}:\{attributeName}]%
* %hardware[~\{regexOverEntPhysicalName}:\{attributeName}]%

Example event definition:

[source, xml]
----
<event>
    <uei>uei.opennms.org/hardware/nodeStatus</uei>
    <event-label>Hardware Information</event-label>
    <descr>
        &lt;p&gt;Hardware information for %nodelabel%.&lt;/p&gt;
        &lt;p&gt;Model Name: %hardware[Chassis:entPhysicalModelName]% &lt;/p&gt;
        &lt;p&gt;Description: %hardware[9:entPhysicalDescr]% &lt;/p&gt;
        &lt;p&gt;Memory Used: %hardware[~^NPE.*:ceExtNVRAMUsed]% &lt;/p&gt;
    </descr>
    <logmsg dest='logndisplay'>&lt;p&gt;Hardware information for %nodelabel%.&lt;/p&gt;</logmsg>
    <alarm-data reduction-key="%uei%:%nodeid%" alarm-type="1" />
</event>
----

> The event definition above is using the following placeholders:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The event definition above uses the following placeholders:
```

[[hardware-inventory-plugin]]
= Hardware Inventory Plugin

== Introduction

{page-component-title} can be extended to import Entity-MIB information from SNMP agents to enrich node data.
There are two types of Entity-MIBs.
The first type is a generic implementation of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4133[RFC 4133 ENTITY-MIB].
The second type are vendor-specific Entity-MIBs, which some manufacturers provide.

These Entity-MIBs provide dynamic attributes to describe device components.
This includes information such as model number, description, serial number, and more.
The optional hardware inventory extension of the Provisiond service will add these fields to nodes in {page-component-title}.

== Installation and configuration

IMPORTANT: To use this feature you have to install the SNMP hardware inventory plugin from the repository.

****
To install the opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory package:

* For RPM-based distributions:
** `yum install opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory`
* For Debian-based distributions:
** `apt-get install opennms-plugin-provisioning-snmp-hardware-inventory`
****

> Once enabled, the hardware inventory plugin will collection the ENTITY-MIB::entPhysicalTable of all devices without any configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once enabled, the hardware inventory plugin collects the ENTITY-MIB::entPhysicalTable of all devices with no configuration.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Once enabled, the hardware inventory plugin collects the ENTITY-MIB::entPhysicalTable of all devices with no additional configuration.
```

> If you want to collect inventory from devices that provide additional fields, you can specify which OIDs to use in the configuration file `$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To collect inventory from devices that provide additional fields, you can specify which OIDs to use in the configuration file `$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`.
```

This file includes support for the https://tools.cisco.com/Support/SNMP/do/BrowseMIB.do?mibName=ENTITY-MIB[CISCO-ENTITY-MIB] as a starter example.

Any MIB column indexed by `entPhysicalIndex` can be added to the configuration file and the hardware inventory adapter will collect the value and store it for each entity that contains a non-null value for the custom attribute.
The `hw-extension` element lets you group a list of Entity-MIB extensions defined in `mibObj` elements based on a sysOidMask of a node.
If the system enterprise ID of the node matches the `sysOidMask` defined on the `hw-extension`, the `mibObj` entities inside are collected for populating the inventory.

> When a vendor provides the standard objects on a different table rather than `entPhysicalTable`, you can override one of the base attributes by specifying on the `mibObj` that the attribute that must be overridden.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a vendor provides the standard objects on a different table rather than `entPhysicalTable`, you can override one of the base attributes by specifying on the `mibObj` that the attribute must be overridden.
```

Author: ```suggestion
When a vendor provides the standard objects on a table other than `entPhysicalTable`, you can override any of the base attributes by specifying which attribute is to be overridden.
```

    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.8"  type="string" alias="ceAssetFirmwareRevision" replace="entPhysicalFirmwareRev" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.9"  type="string" alias="ceAssetSoftwareID" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.10" type="string" alias="ceAssetSoftwareRevision" replace="entPhysicalSoftwareRev" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.11" type="string" alias="ceAssetCLEI" />
    <mibObj oid=".1.3.6.1.4.1.9.9.92.1.1.1.12" type="string" alias="ceAssetAlias" />
</hw-extension>
----

In this example, only the nodes that match the `sysOidMask .1.3.6.1.4.1.9` (Cisco devices) are candidates to discover the custom `mibObj` entities defined on the extension group.
The definition of `ceAssetSerialNumber` has been configured to replace one of the base attributes `entPhysicalSerialNum` so the adapter will know to override the generic Entity-MIB attribute instead of creating a new custom attribute entry.

Once you have configured your `snmp-hardware-inventory-adapter-configuration.xml`, the Provisiond service attempts to collect hardware inventory data when it refreshes requisitions.

> After synchronizing the requisition, you should be able to see a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventorySuccessful` event to confirm inventory was collected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After synchronizing the requisition, you should see a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventorySuccessful` event to confirm inventory was collected.
```

This event is triggered only when the provisioning adapter detects changed hardware inventory for a node.
If there is a problem retrieving or storing the inventory data, a `uei.opennms.org/internal/discovery/hardwareInventoryFailed` event will be sent instead.

== Viewing collected hardware inventory information

To view inventory information collected for a node, click the "Hardware Info" link on the node's page in the Web UI.
If the node has hardware inventory, {page-component-title} displays all collected fields.

TIP: It is also possible to retrieve and update hardware inventory information via the xref:development:rest/nodes.adoc#nodes-rest[Nodes REST endpoint].
See the REST documentation for more information.

== Using hardware information in events and notifications

> A set of placeholders are available in {page-component-title} to enrich the content of the events, alarms, and notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A set of placeholders is available in {page-component-title} to enrich the content of the events, alarms, and notifications.
```

Because of the hierarchical nature of the hardware entities, you must provide two fields to obtain the value of the required attribute.
These two fields are either the `entPhysicalIndex` or the `entPhysicalName` and the name of the attribute to use.

The `entPhysicalIndex` guarantees that you always get the same entity.
Using `entPhysicalName` is not always a unique way to identify an entity, depending on the device manufacturer.
When using the name, the first entity that matches the given `entPhysicalName` is used.

Specify a regular expression to validate against the `entPhysicalName` by prefixing the field with a `~`.
When using regular expression matching, the first attribute matched is used.

Sample placeholders naming structure:

> * %hardware[\{entPhysicalIndex}:\{attributeName}]%

Reviewer 2: Do we need to keep the escape character in these three lines?

Author: Yes we do.  Otherwise there are Antora build errors.
